Zelensky Opens Way to Demilitarized Zone in Eastern Ukraine to Reach Peace
The offer was the closest Mr. Zelensky has come to addressing the thorny territorial disputes in Donetsk that have repeatedly derailed peace talks.


Listen to this article · 8:13 min Learn more
Share full article

505
Massive piles of building rubble and damaged structures fill the background. A person with red hair walks by, holding two bright yellow bags.
A building in Sloviansk, one of two Ukrainian-held cities that form Kyiv’s last main defensive belt in the Donetsk region in the east.Credit...Tyler Hicks/The New York Times
Constant Méheut
By Constant Méheut
Reporting from Kyiv, Ukraine

Dec. 24, 2025
Updated 11:15 a.m. ET
President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine told reporters on Tuesday that he was ready to pull his troops back from areas of the eastern Donetsk region still under Kyiv’s control and turn those areas into a demilitarized zone as part of a possible peace deal with Moscow.

The offer was the closest Mr. Zelensky has come to addressing the thorny territorial disputes in Donetsk that have repeatedly derailed peace talks, signaling his willingness to compromise after weeks of U.S.-mediated negotiations.

But the proposal also hinted at the significant gaps that remain between Ukraine and Russia. Mr. Zelensky’s offer of a demilitarized zone came with a condition: Russia would have to pull its forces from an equivalent stretch of land in Donetsk. So far, the Kremlin has given no indication that it is willing to accept anything less than full control over the region.


BELARUS

RUSSIA

Kyiv

UKRAINE

Area of Donetsk still controlled by

Ukraine

LUHANSK

HELD BY

RUSSIA

Current

front line

MOLDOVA

DONETSK

ZAPORIZHZHIA

ROMANIA

KHERSON

CRIMEA

Source: The Institute for the Study of War with American Enterprise Institute’s Critical Threats Project (areas of control as of Dec. 8, 2025)
The proposal forms part of a revised 20-point peace plan that was drawn up by Ukraine and the United States in the past few weeks and that Mr. Zelensky presented to reporters in Kyiv on Tuesday. The blueprint covers a broad range of issues, from potential territorial arrangements to the security guarantees Kyiv wants to prevent future Russian aggression, as well as plans to rebuild the war-ravaged nation.

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Mr. Zelensky portrayed the plan as Ukraine’s best effort to end the war and said it was now up to Russia to decide how to respond. He said that the new draft was being presented to Russia by the United States, and that Kyiv expected a reply by Wednesday evening.

The Ukrainian leader said the various points in the plan “largely reflect the joint Ukrainian American position.” But Kyiv and Washington did not reach an agreement on two sticking points: the fate of Ukrainian-held territory in Donetsk and control of a major nuclear plant currently occupied by Russia. On the second point, Kyiv offered to manage the plant jointly with the United States as a form of compromise.

Want to stay updated on what’s happening in Russia and Ukraine? Sign up for Your Places: Global Update, and we’ll send our latest coverage to your inbox.
It remained unclear how the proposed Ukrainian concessions not yet accepted by the United States would be communicated by American officials to Moscow.

Image
President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine gestures with open hands, speaking into a microphone. A blue flag with yellow stars is softly blurred behind him.
President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine in Brussels last week. He said that he was ready to pull troops back from areas of the eastern Donetsk region and turn the area into a demilitarized zone, as part of a possible peace deal.Credit...John Thys/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Still, Kyiv’s proposed concessions, even if accepted in full by the United States, are likely to be rejected by Moscow. The Kremlin has insisted that its primary goal is a full military takeover of Donetsk — whether achieved on the battlefield or at the negotiating table — and has dismissed any notion of returning the nuclear plant to Ukrainian control.

The Kremlin said President Vladimir V. Putin had been briefed about the latest negotiations. “We aim to formulate our future stance and resume our contacts shortly,” the Kremlin spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, said on Wednesday.

Mr. Zelensky voiced cautious optimism that Moscow would not openly rebuff the new proposal for fear of angering President Trump. If it did, he added, the Kremlin should face serious consequences.

“They cannot tell President Trump: ‘Look, we are against a peaceful settlement,” he told reporters. “That is, if they try to obstruct everything, then President Trump would have to arm us heavily, while imposing all possible sanctions against them.”

“We have come significantly closer to finalizing the documents,” he said about a possible peace deal.

Editors’ Picks

Your Top Health Questions of 2025

The Rockettes, at 100, Need a Kick in the Right Direction

Tuck Yourself In at Night. Then Tuck Your Bed In for the Day.
SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

As he spoke on Tuesday, the Ukrainian leader was reading from a stack of documents outlining the proposal, along with separate addendums on security guarantees and Ukraine’s postwar reconstruction. Several sentences in the proposal were highighted in red, marking what Mr. Zelensky said were the most debated points.

The main point of contention — control over the Donetsk region — has been subject to multiple proposals in recent months. Russia first offered to swap territories it captured elsewhere in Ukraine in exchange for the part of Donetsk it has yet to capture. Ukraine rejected the offer, arguing that it could not cede any land that was not occupied.

A peace proposal drafted by Russia and the United States last month then called for Ukrainian forces to withdraw from the areas of Donetsk they currently hold and turn them into a neutral demilitarized zone.

Image
Several people in camouflage uniforms gather around a military vehicle and a pile of munition casings. 
Ukrainian soldiers reloading a howitzer in the Donetsk region in June. Disagreements over the future of the region have repeatedly derailed peace talks.Credit...Tyler Hicks/The New York Times
The new draft peace plan Mr. Zelensky unveiled says Ukraine is ready to build on the idea of a demilitarized zone by expanding it to include not only areas vacated by Ukrainian forces but also Russian-controlled areas from which Moscow would pull its troops.

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

Mr. Zelensky emphasized that any Ukrainian pullback should be matched by Russia, though the exact size of the proposed zone remains unclear. In Donetsk, he said, the demilitarized zone could include Kramatorsk and Sloviansk, two Ukrainian-held cities that form Kyiv’s last main defensive belt in the eastern region. A buffer zone administered by international forces would separate the two sides within the demilitarized area.

Territory is perhaps the most difficult issue in a peace deal because it touches on multiple complex factors. Militarily, Ukraine cannot afford to give up heavily fortified areas of Donetsk that could serve as launch points for further Russian attacks. There are also humanitarian concerns related to the relocation of residents. And ceding control over parts of Ukrainian territory could deal a serious blow to national morale.

For all these reasons, Mr. Zelensky said establishing a demilitarized zone would have to be approved by Ukrainians through a referendum. The proposed plan also says Ukraine will hold elections as soon as possible after a peace deal is signed. Mr. Zelensky’s own five-year presidential term would have expired in May of last year, but was extended under martial law rules in place since Russia’s invasion in 2022.

Mr. Zelensky described the potential demilitarized areas as a “free economic zone.” While the potential economic opportunities of the war-ravaged territory remain unclear, the phrasing may be intended to appeal to Mr. Trump’s business-oriented mind-set and to American businesses drawn by Ukraine’s mineral riches in areas close to the front.

Image
A damaged, multistory apartment building, charred black, with bare trees in the foreground. Two people, one wearing a red coat, look out from an upper balcony.
A building damaged in a Russian drone strike in Kramatorsk this month. Mr. Zelensky said a demilitarized zone could include that city, one of two that form the country’s last main defensive belt in the region.Credit...Anatolii Stepanov/Reuters
Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT

The Ukrainian leader said that a free economic zone could be established around the Russian-occupied nuclear plant, located near the frontline in the southern Zaporizhzhia region. The plant has not been operating since 2022, but as the largest nuclear plant in Europe, with capacity to generate up to six gigawatts of electricity, its economic potential is enormous.

Mr. Zelensky said the United States had proposed that Washington, Kyiv and Moscow share control and profits from the plant. But he added that Kyiv could not agree to trade energy with Moscow. Under the new proposal, he said, the plant would operate as a joint venture between Kyiv and Washington — an offer that Moscow is unlikely to accept.

Other parts of the plan deal more directly with America’s economic interests as part of Ukraine’s reconstruction efforts.

It envisions a new investment fund to finance Ukraine’s reconstruction, with U.S. companies supporting projects in the country, including in the energy sector. The fund would draw on both public and private investors, with Mr. Zelensky saying the United States may contribute $100 billion and Europe a similar amount. It remains unclear where the money would come from and whether European countries have agreed to the plan. The ultimate goal is to raise up to $800 billion for Ukraine’s rebuilding.

Other points in the proposal relate to the security guarantees Ukraine seeks. They would include keeping Ukraine’s army at a peacetime strength of 800,000 troops, with funding from Western partners; membership in the European Union; European military support; and bilateral security guarantees from the United States.

Mr. Zelensky said European military support would come from the so-called Coalition of the Willing, a group of about 30 countries that have committed to strengthening Ukraine’s postwar security by contributing to its defenses in the air, on land and at sea. That could include the deployment of European forces in Ukraine — a nonstarter for the Kremlin.